You are listening to radio lab radio from W N Y.
S. T.
Hey, I'm Jad Abumrad, I'm Robert Krulwich Radiolab.
And what we're going to do in this particular show is we're going to, um,
this is one of my favorites. Yeah. Favor, right. Cause you weirdly,
you certainly gave it your all. Exactly. Um, I don't know. Wait,
what do we say here? I mean this is like a,
this is a little bit of a tussle and we sorta wanted to bring it back cause you
know, winter's approaching things are kind of heavy right now.
We could use a little lightness wa so this begins with a very,
very successful uh, film editor with a, well you'll,
you'll meet him in a moment.
Comes to us with an idea with Jad loves I hate and things go from there.
Perfect. Can hear us now. Hello. Hello? Hello? Hello. It starts with Walter,
my hero,
Walter Murcia.
I'm a film editor and sound designer and I've been working in films since the
late 1960s.
Resume includes, I'm going to make him on, off we go, the godfather
apocalypse now. I love the smell of pump in the morning, ton of other films,
the thing we're talking about.
So you should know is the one of the more spectacular stories I've ever heard.
How did you bump into this tail?
Well, I was in Leon in France doing a film,
unbearable lightness of being. This is back in 1986.
I was supposed to be there for a week and it wound up,
I was there for a month and I ran out of things to read.
So I went down the street from the hotel and there was a bookstore and uh,
I was interested and still am in cosmology. You saw,
I picked up a book by the, uh, Carl Sagan of France,
a man named Hubert Reeves. Yeah. You there
actually he's French Canadian. He translates this Gal Sago. Anyway,
merchant ends up buying Reeves book, goes back to the hotel, finds a cozy spot.
So I was happily reading away and he was trying to explain with some difficulty
because it was a difficult topic.
How did matter condense out of the sort of cork soup that we believe happened
right after the big bang. And He tried various, uh,
attempts scientifically, but then he said to give you a sense of,
uh, the poetry of this moment.
The best thing is the story that Mala parte tells
who is in Malheur Party. Well, he was a journalist,
a poet, a diplomat soldier,
prisoner film director, and somebody who, uh,
got around. Yeah.
And speaking of getting around in 1942,
a Melanie's newspaper [inaudible] the loss, Sarah sent Malaparte Day
to report, um, on the eastern and northern fronts of war,
specifically the Russian Finnish border.
And he had a front row seat of the siege of London ground,
the agony of the Nazi bombardment of that city. And it's from there.
Then Malaparte he tells his story.
So this one day, this was in the winter,
Mala party was posted with the Finnish army who were fighting along with the
Nazis and they were perched just north of Leningrad on the shores of Lake
Ladoga, which is this big lake abutting the city. And on this day
[inaudible]
the Nazis are bombarded area around the lake.
This started a forest fire. Everyone ran for cover.
Soldiers ran every which way.
In the middle of the forest there were Soviet forces that were locked up in a
stable and we fortunately panicked and broke out of the stable hundreds of them
and they just started running in Russian to get away from the fire. Right?
So you have hundreds of horses bolting through this flaming forest heading
towards the open space I had,
which was the lake and all the ones they burst out of the forest and go
barreling into the lake.
Stampeding one on top of the other is the all get deeper and deeper into their
heads.
And it is this moment when they enter the lake that according to the story,
something very weird happens in the blink of an eye.
[inaudible]
snaps them shot, it just freezes,
suddenly turns to ice with a bang.
It goes from water to ice with this violent snap and suddenly the horses are in
to mellow Carthay writes it.
Even the waves on the lake were gripped in mid air and sort of suspended there.
You doubt
the next morning when Mullah party in the fins woke up,
they discovered the forest fire had burned itself out. And look at that.
The lake has frozen solid overnight and his finished friends said, yes,
that sometimes happens. And then they are looking to see what are those bumps?
Uh, on the ice over there they go to investigate.
And I find themselves in this horrific sculpture garden of horses heads sticking
up out of the solid marble like floor of ice,
you said hundreds. So hundreds of course heads hundreds of abortions.
These are the, these are not gonna Decay, right? Cause it's freezing cold.
Or they looked there,
they said those horses stayed there all winter and a Muller party was there in
that region of the world, uh, during that winter. And uh,
every so often he and the other soldiers would go and have a smoke and they'd go
into the sculpture garden and wander around looking at this miraculous thing.
So this image of the horses frozen
in this lake,
there's image beautiful and strange and disturbing and a profound in some way
made us wonder what made me wonder. I should say, I told you at the time,
it don't trust this story. It's not scientifically impossible.
And I keeping an open heart, you thought, could this possibly be true?
Could, could there be a grain, perhaps several grains,
perhaps a lake's worth of grains of truth. Your heart, the story.
Just your mind is like loose like a thing. Anyway,
I did this for a year. Yeah. And you know what? We're gonna,
we're gonna reconstruct that argument right now and take this uptown. All right.
All right. Let's do this to a real scientist, to a real scientist.
In the course of our argument,
we ended up going uptown to Rockefeller University to meet a couple of people
who know about ice.
So we're going to go play with some super cool ice among them.
This fellow. Okay. I'm Alexandra Petroff. I in the Raymond and Beverly Sackler.
Fogo. Did you ever wonder who I, Raymond and Beverly Sackler?
They occasionally almost show up and I almost meet them, but I never have. Yeah.
By the way, the Sackler family has recently come into a bit of controversy.
We all know that now. We didn't at the time. In any case,
Alex, who must be said is an amazing dude,
graciously agreed to demonstrate that you can in fact create the conditions of
that massive lake inside a tiny little test too. Oh,
can somebody hold this road of in here and I'll get the tube set up inside his
freezer. Grabbed his trusty Falcon. Yup. This is called a falcon tube.
Just a blessing too. Filled with water. No, this is not normal water.
This is the really nice water. It's very, very pure water. No minerals,
no Dustin.
They're like super distilled and he says when you take water like that and you
cool it down, you can get it far below its freezing point and it won't freeze.
Yeah,
unless that is, you happened to have a horse. You have a tiny horse here.
We have a tiny office and we're going to drop that into the Falcon Tube and do
that. That's going to be awesome. So he handed us the tube.
I'm holding a little vile of super cooled water. What? Alex?
What temperature do you think this is that am I going to make money?
This is mine. Minus 20 c c Celsius. Wait,
when does water freeze and says zero. So it's 20 degrees below freezing point.
It's still water, but now for long cause we unscrewed the cap. Are you?
Are you filming?
We held a little plastic horse over the tube countdown or something. Okay.
On the count of three. Guilty. All right. Three, two, one.
[inaudible]
for dad because the moment that little plastic cores hit the water,
the water is slammed into ice.
Suddenly that little guy was trapped in an ice cube. Oh my God.
He's Thor's is frozen. That's amazing.
Please remember the portion was plastic.
No animals were harmed in this experiment. Is this honestly breathtaking?
It happens so fast.
Catastrophic ice formation just like that through the c word. Robert.
Say it again. Catastrophic.
This is Virginia Walker and I'm in the department of Biology Queens University.
Virginia was one of the many people that we called up to ask like what the hell?
Like why does this happen? It shouldn't.
This water just frees gradually the way that most water does, you know,
at 32 degrees Fahrenheit or whatever. No, actually, so you see,
this is why we have to start at the beginning. As Julie Andrews says,
a very good place to start. Right? Alright.
So the only reason that water freezes normally at zero Celsius and 32 Fahrenheit
is that the something that that makes it freeze? We call that a nuclear later.
Sounds like a superhero. Yeah. All right,
so then you can eat 10 a nuclear is like a seed, right?
Didn't know this,
but it turns out water almost always needs a seed in order to grow ice.
So it turns out water by itself is not actually that good at remembering how to
become ice. That is Aaron pedit.
She is a glaciologist at the University of Alaska.
Fairbanks in which means is that when water cools down,
the molecules start to slow their movement.
They get a little bit closer together and at that point they want all hold hands
and become ice set.
The water molecules don't quite remember very well how they're supposed to be
organized. They're like, wait, do you stand here and I stand here.
How do we do this? Again,
they need to be shown what combination of angles work the best to create a nice
stable structure. What they need is say a speck of dust.
That's the nuclear he's throwing some dust into otherwise pure water.
Now they have a guide because ice can start to mimic whatever the,
the shape of the dust particle is who,
what happens is that the water molecules start to form a cage around the dust
particle and that cage shape is very similar to the shape they need to make ice
and suddenly they're like, oh, that's how we do it. So in a sense,
the dust particle is reminding the watermelon qls how to freeze.
Well, no, I don't think of it like that.
Virginia says it's actually a not quite so gentle.
Really what's happening is the dust particle is forcing the water molecules into
the right shape around it. It's like a, it's like a command.
It's nothing about memory. It's, it's, it's a physical thing.
They just get jammed in there. Wow. Let's just like Julie Andrews, like a Nazi.
So then these, these, these ice.
Okay, so if as we just learned water needs a catalyst to nucleate or in order to
freeze,
does it this at least raise the possibility that that Finnish Russian lake had
reached a super cooled state along come these horses and they were the
nucleators. Maybe they had dust on their hair or whatever. I know,
but whatever it was, it started a chain reaction.
Ice Spread outward from these horses shot across the entire lake and froze the
whole damn thing at once.
[inaudible]
and like I feel,
excuse me for just a second because this is like a tyrading like impulse. I have
can hold yours there. All right,
we're going to take a break and we will continue this meaningless tussle in just
a moment.
This is Alicia bridges calling from Saskatoon in Saskatchewan.
Radiolab is supported in part by the Alfred p Sloan Foundation,
enhancing public understanding of science and technology in the modern world.
More information aboutSloan@wwwdotsloan.org
hey podcast listeners.
There's a new podcast coming from wny z studios and it's for kids.
Wow. Can you hear my voice? Or the headphones are not.
This podcast has fleas,
tells the story of a dog and a cat heir who live in the same house but have
competing podcasts, cat lovers. This is laughing the litter box coming at you.
What a show. So I know this podcast has,
please subscribe where ever you get your podcasts.
Okay, so Jad Robert Radiolab.
Before the break we posited what I thought was an interesting theory, Robert,
not buying it. Yeah. We'll get to your skepticism in a moment,
but I want to talk a little bit more about nucleators for a second because when
we were talking with Virginia, she told us something kind of cool. Uh,
we asked her like, what else? Uh, nucleates ice, like we learned about dust,
but what else can do it? Okay, so the best nuclear later is ice itself.
She says,
if a little bit of snow falls into some water or a little bit ice forms in the
water, organically, the water molecules will rush around that and Bam,
if you don't have ice,
what is the second best thing to nucleate this ice happens to be bacteria.
Turns out she says there are three different kinds of bacteria.
They can generate these special proteins,
[inaudible] protein that can instantly turn water into ice. In fact,
when we were reporting this story of video started circulating on the Internet,
it showed a scientist taken a bottle of water, squirting coat,
a little bit of this bacteria in, and then the thing just shocked in the ice.
And the cool thing is these bacteria are actually plant pathogens,
plant killers,
and so you've probably seen grass growing in your backyard or whatever and it
can be all covered with frost,
but then you know the frost can melt and it's still green. Yeah,
but if those bacteria present,
she says they'll spit out their proteins onto the plant,
which generates these ice crystals, the ice crystals,
then slice the plant open and expose the inside of the plant.
At the bacteria say, hmm, yummy. He has lunch and the eat the uh,
eat the inside of the plant. It's a good strategy, but that's not the cool part.
Virginia says she is also found these proteins in bacteria that don't kill
plants. So that made me think, made her wonder why,
like why would they need to make ice?
And that's when it occurred to her and a few other researchers.
Maybe it's about transportation. Exactly what we'll think about it.
These bacteria are just sitting on these plants and what happens is
the wind comes along,
blows up this little bacteria into the upper atmosphere,
blows them literally up into the clouds. They're not particularly cold hardy.
So now they have a situation, they do not want to be all the way up there.
They got to get back down to the earth.
And unless they hitch a ride on those horses that you keep talking about,
they're so light, they might not come down to earth. So what they do,
she suspects is they use the plant trick.
They spit out these proteins into the cold wet cloud,
which galvanizes the water molecules around them. To form
a snowflake around their body.
So now they've got this little hovercraft that they can use to coast on down
fifth, they make ice,
they can get back down and they can get back down in a different place and start
a new colony of bacteria somewhere else. And so by this way,
they get disbursed around the whole Earth. Think about that.
The next time it's winter and it's snows.
Apparently if you melt each snowflake,
you will find a little bacterium inside it.
You're saying all of them, all the stuff. I,
I haven't looked at every single snowflake, of course,
but it makes perfect sense, doesn't it? That's a myth. That's a very,
very cool idea. Yeah.
I suddenly like the bacteria Movio hell of a lot better than the horse movie.
So at least I, I've, you know, and, and, and at least has a shot at being true.
Yeah. The horses.
So when we were reporting this story and talking to Aaron Pettit and Virginia
Walker and a bunch of other scientists, when we asked them,
could an entire leg have flash frozen in an instant,
trapping all those horses uniformly? The answer that we got was no.
Did you hear her? No. There. Did you hear the sound of it?
Let me ask it to a different way. When you say absolutely not,
just to kind of a gentle no,
I'd say that's an absolutely not because as Aaron told us,
when you're talking about freezing an entire lake,
well you've got a lot of problems to consider. First.
The process of freezing actually is a source of heat itself because like when
water molecules form bonds to make ice,
that's a lot of activity and activity produces energy and now that's gonna make
things a bit warmer.
Not to mention the fact that horses are warm blood in animals,
so they also would slow down the process of freezing. Right. Also,
the water would never have been pure enough to super cool in the first place
because there's,
there's too many things in the lake that would provide that initial nucleation
plants, organisms, dirt. Dammit. Did somebody actually see this?
What is the actual evidence that um, no,
nobody saw any of this as it actually happened when we told Walter Marsh with
the scientists, told us in typical, uh, Walter Mertz fashion,
he was IC calm and he reminded us that he never told us it was true that mallet
parte often mixed fact and fiction.
And that the real reason he was attracted to this story was because it offered a
metaphor for cosmology right at the beginning of the universe.
Really. I mean, we, I feel,
excuse me if a small bit of skepticism will do things,
it's true for the universe. Metaphor, metaphor, metaphor, even.
So come on. What does he mean? What did he mean? Here's what he means.
And if you're a physicist listening right now, just turn off the radio.
So we're just talking among ourselves here, right?
So you can think of it in one of two ways, right?
The first is that idea of super cooling that we saw at Rockefeller where under
the right circumstances, water can cool down way below its freezing point,
not freeze. And then all of a sudden
[inaudible]
and you can suddenly do that, which we saw at Rockefeller in the test tube. Now,
according to Janell 11 professor of physics and astronomy, Barnet College,
Columbia University,
the metaphor holds because that bizarro flash freezing phenomenon actually
happened repeatedly. She says in the moments after the Big Bang, yes,
Super Cooling is definitely something that happens in the early universe.
She says right when the universe got it start, it was still small,
like the size of a grapefruit inside there. Grapefruit,
it was extremely hot back then. It was probably a million, trillion, trillion,
trillion times hotter. [inaudible] million, trillion, trillion, trillion,
10 to the 32 times hotter, but as a little grapefruit began to expand,
the temperature started to drop and it dropped and drop to a point where the
universe should freeze, so to speak,
but it didn't and it's waiting. It's waiting to freeze and you're like,
what's happening? Why aren't you freezing? Then suddenly, oh, there it goes.
Phase change, so go ahead. Okay. I don't know exactly what you're saying.
We keep going. All I'm saying is there's a lot of face changes.
Some of them were super cool, don't worry about it. Okay.
There's another parallel, which I think is actually even more interesting, um,
has to do with those seeds we talk about. So if you go back to the grapefruit,
okay, inside it's very, very hot.
You've got this wash of energy and this energy is uniform, right?
It's [inaudible]
all [inaudible]
the same thing spread
evenly, everywhere, the same. But then as things cool,
you begin to get these tiny fluctuations,
little variations in temperature and density where it's a little bit harder and
denser in one point than another.
We're talking about clumps like maybe over here is a little bit more matter in
heap and over there, and these are our, see,
I see. I don't think that you're describing seeds like I understand.
See if seeds are little things that happen, things that track other stuff. No,
no.
But these behave just like seeds because as the universe cools down and expands
and begins to add all these new forces and all these new particles, gravity,
electron, photons, atoms,
those little bits of variation from the beginning are still there.
And now they're growing bigger because now we have gravity, right?
So a little concentrations of stuff are now attracting more stuff and more stuff
and more stuff. And as the universe expands,
they expand into ultimately those little blips have become these massive
objects. Amazing. Yeah.
The the largest structures that we know about in the universe have their seeds
in these tiny fluctuations.
What does that mean? When you go on a,
on a star wars kind of voyage?
So you're in your spaceship and you're going at some incredibly high speeds,
you're rushing through the universe and you see huge clouds of gas with
nurseries for stars and you leave them and you go to a galaxy and then another
galaxy. Here's a galaxy over here and a galaxy over there.
And collectively here you're saying that these massive structures,
walls of galaxies, neighborhoods of stars,
there's going are reflections of a very early moment when something went right
in the initial broil of stuff like this.
Some beautiful structures that you're describing are like the snowflakes around
the little bit of dust.
What does that mean?
That the empty spaces that we see when we gaze at the current universe are
actually filled with something that hasn't cooled yet or that isn't quite or
isn't visible to us or is working under different rules?
If I can hijack your question,
I can say we might not have seen the last of the phase transitions.
Our Universe is absolutely continuing to cool. Is it really? Yeah,
it's very cold right now. We have this, uh,
dark energy driving the universe to expand at an ever accelerated rate and it's
conceivable that in the future that energy will endure some phase transition and
it will go away or, or decay to something else in this new state of matter.
It might do something different to the evolution of the universe.
So we might have a phase transition in our future.
[inaudible] [inaudible]
suddenly
[inaudible]
aw,
Nice. Oh, great guys. Yeah. Nice. Yeah.
We have many people to thank who helped us on this particular podcast. Totally.
Producers, Matthew Kielty, Molly Webster, whoo. Also Amanda around check,
Tish Boucher for sure. And Marine Bhutto,
the super cool people at Rockefeller University.
Genie Garbarino Phillip Kid, and of course Alexander Petrov. Thanks also to
Jeffers Sandstrom Inger Herberg Mark Martin, Martin troffer,
Mark Tuckerman and Jason Wexler.
And sincere thanks to all the listeners from Facebook and Twitter who helped us
translate Russian and Finnish books. Oh, and uh,
certainly last but not least, Walter merge for being my hero.
Chad loves you. I love you. And more importantly,
he released a book translating Malaparte Day from, uh,
Italian to English, uh, which is where we got the story of the, uh,
of the horses falling in the lake.
It's called the bird that swallowed it's cage.
The selected writings have Curzio Malaparte Day. All right. So that's,
that's us saying, oh, wait, one more thing. One more thing. Go to our website,
radiolab.org and you can see videos we shot at Rockefeller of water turning into
ice. In a flash, super cooling right in front of your eyes. It's amazing.
radiolab.org I'm jet. Boom. Rod. I'm Robert Quote,
and thanks for listening.